README.md, before:

[![Build Status](https://app.travis-ci.com/txpull/solgo.svg?branch=main)](https://app.travis-ci.com/txpull/solgo)
[![Coverage Status](https://coveralls.io/repos/github/txpull/solgo/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://coveralls.io/github/txpull/solgo?branch=main)
[![Go Report Card](https://goreportcard.com/badge/github.com/txpull/solgo)](https://goreportcard.com/report/github.com/txpull/solgo)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-Apache_2.0-blue.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/Apache-2.0)
[![PkgGoDev](https://pkg.go.dev/badge/github.com/txpull/solgo)](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/txpull/solgo)

# Solidity Parser in Golang

SolGo contains a Solidity parser written in Golang, using Antlr and AntlrGo for grammar parsing. The aim of this project is to provide a tool to parse Solidity source code into a structured format, enabling further analysis.

The parser is generated from a Solidity grammar file using Antlr, producing a lexer, parser, and listener using AntlrGo. This allows for the syntactic analysis of Solidity code, transforming it into a parse tree that can be traversed and manipulated.

This project is ideal for developers working with Solidity smart contracts who wish to leverage the power and efficiency of Golang for their analysis tools.

## WARNINGS

- Protocol buffers are still under heavy development, some of them only boilerplated.
- Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) is still under heavy development. Functional to a point but with bugs and some
  deliberate panics so code can be captured and fixed!
- This project is still under heavy development, some of the features are not implemented yet.
- This project is not yet ready for use in production.

## Why?

In my projects, I have a strong preference for using Golang or Rust over Javascript. I found myself needing to parse Solidity code and conduct some analysis on it. During my research, I discovered several projects that aimed to do this. However, they were either incomplete, not maintained, or not written in Go at all. This led me to the decision to create this project. The goal is to provide a Solidity parser in Golang that is as "complete as possible" and well-maintained. I'm excited to see how this project will develop and evolve.

## Documentation

To be defined ...

## Solidity Language Grammar

Latest Solidity language grammar higher overview and detailed description can be found [here](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.19/grammar.html).

## ANTLR Grammar

We are using grammar files that are maintained by the Solidity team.
Link to the grammar files can be found [here](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/tree/develop/docs/grammar).

## ANTLR Go

We are using the ANTLR4 Go runtime library to generate the parser. Repository can be found [here](https://github.com/antlr4-go/antlr).


## Features

- **Protocol Buffers**: SolGo uses [Protocol Buffers](https://github.com/txpull/protos) to define the structure of the data that is passed between the parser and the listener. This provides a structured format for the data, enabling more effective analysis.
- **AST (Abstract Syntax Tree) Generation:** SolGo includes an ASTBuilder that constructs an Abstract Syntax Tree for Solidity code. The AST represents the structure of the code and provides a high-level representation of its elements.
- **Intermediate Representation (IR) Generation**: SolGo can generate an Intermediate Representation (IR) from the AST. The IR provides a language-agnostic representation of the contract, capturing key elements such as functions, state variables, events, and more. This enables more advanced analysis and manipulation of the contract.
- **ABI Generation and Interaction:** SolGo can parse contract definitions to generate Ethereum contract ABIs (Application Binary Interfaces), providing a structured representation of the contract's functions, events, and variables. It also includes functionality for normalizing type names and handling complex types like mappings, enabling more effective interaction with contracts on the ethereum-based networks.
- **Error Handling**: SolGo includes a SyntaxErrorListener which collects syntax errors encountered during parsing, providing detailed error information including line, column, message, severity, and context.
- **Syntactic Analysis**: SolGo transforms Solidity code into a parse tree that can be traversed and manipulated, providing a detailed syntactic analysis of the code.
- **Listener Registration**: SolGo allows for the registration of custom listeners that can be invoked as the parser walks the parse tree, enabling custom handling of parse events.
- **Contextual Parsing**: SolGo provides a ContextualSolidityParser that maintains a stack of contexts, allowing for context-specific parsing rules.
- **Automatic Source Detection**: SolGo automatically loads and integrates Solidity contracts from well-known libraries such as [OpenZeppelin](https://github.com/OpenZeppelin/openzeppelin-contracts). This feature allows for seamless interaction and analysis of contracts that rely on these libraries, enhancing the overall understanding of the contract's structure and dependencies.


## Extensions

- [SolGo RPC](https://github.com/txpull/solgo-rpc): A RPC server that exposes the functionality of SolGo via a gRPC. **(Under development)**


## Getting Started

To use SolGo, you will need to have Golang installed on your machine. You can then import SolGo into your Go programs like this:

```go
import "github.com/txpull/solgo"
```

## Logger setup

SolGo uses [zap](https://github.com/uber-go/zap) logger. To setup logger you can use following code:

```go
import (
	"go.uber.org/zap"
	"go.uber.org/zap/zapcore"
)

// ....

config := zap.NewDevelopmentConfig()
config.EncoderConfig.EncodeLevel = zapcore.CapitalColorLevelEncoder
logger, err := config.Build()
if err != nil {
	panic(err)
}

zap.ReplaceGlobals(logger)
```

I've deliberately decided not to pass logger as a reference to each struct. Truth to be told, with loggers, I am lazy to pass it everywhere... Instead, I'm using `zap.L()` function to get logger instance in each struct.

One day we can do something more efficient with logging. For now, this is good enough.

## Examples

Detailed examples of how to use this package can be found in the [Documentation](/docs/) section. These examples provide guidance on various operations such as extracting the ABI, AST, or contract information from Solidity code.


## Development Setup

To set up the development environment for this project, follow these steps:

1. **Go 1.19+**: Make sure you have Go version 1.19 or higher installed. You can find installation instructions [here](https://golang.org/doc/install).

2. **Java**: You need Java version 11 or higher installed to generate the parser. You can download Java from [here](https://www.oracle.com/java/technologies/javase-jdk11-downloads.html). After installing Java, make sure to set the `JAVA_HOME` environment variable to the location of your Java installation.

3. **ANTLR4**: The ANTLR4 is already included in this repository as .jar, which can be found in the [antlr](/antlr) directory. You don't need to build it separately. The current version used is 4.13.0.

Once you have completed these steps, you can start developing and testing your changes. To run the tests, use the command `make test` from the root directory of the repository.

The parser files are already generated and can be found in the [parser](/parser) directory. If you want to regenerate the parser, use the command `make generate` from the root directory of the repository. This will regenerate the parser files and place them in the [parser](/parser) directory.


## Contributing

Contributions to SolGo are always welcome! If you have a feature request, bug report, or proposal for improvement, please open an issue. If you wish to contribute code, please fork the repository, make your changes, and submit a pull request.


## License

SolGo is licensed under the Apache 2.0. See [LICENSE](LICENSE) for the full license text.


## Acknowledgements

We would like to express our gratitude to the Solidity team for maintaining the Solidity grammar files, and to the Antlr and AntlrGo team for providing the powerful Antlr tool that makes this project possible.

Commit message:

Application Binary Interface (ABI) 2.0 (#55)
* First round to abi rewrite, including gosec github action

* Ast Builder CWE-276 resolution

* Resolving tests CWE-22 security issue

* Parsing constructor abi

* Receive and Fallback ABI support

* Receive basic unit test

* Fallback basic unit test

* Basic constructor unit test

* Just basic unit test for state variable

* Adding basic unit test for functions

* Basic unit test for events

* Helpers test basic

* Just series of basic type tests, without usage of ir builder

* Removal of abis path as it's no longer in use. Finished 2.0 initial coding for abi package

* Documentation, protocol buffers, cleanups... Ready for release

README.md, after:

[![Build Status](https://app.travis-ci.com/txpull/solgo.svg?branch=main)](https://app.travis-ci.com/txpull/solgo)
[![Coverage Status](https://coveralls.io/repos/github/txpull/solgo/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://coveralls.io/github/txpull/solgo?branch=main)
[![Go Report Card](https://goreportcard.com/badge/github.com/txpull/solgo)](https://goreportcard.com/report/github.com/txpull/solgo)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-Apache_2.0-blue.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/Apache-2.0)
[![PkgGoDev](https://pkg.go.dev/badge/github.com/txpull/solgo)](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/txpull/solgo)

# Solidity Parser in Golang

SolGo contains a Solidity parser written in Golang, using Antlr and AntlrGo for grammar parsing. The aim of this project is to provide a tool to parse Solidity source code into a structured format, enabling further analysis.

The parser is generated from a Solidity grammar file using Antlr, producing a lexer, parser, and listener using AntlrGo. This allows for the syntactic analysis of Solidity code, transforming it into a parse tree that can be traversed and manipulated.

This project is ideal for developers working with Solidity smart contracts who wish to leverage the power and efficiency of Golang for their analysis tools.

## Disclaimer

Please be aware that this project is still under active development. While it is approaching a state suitable for production use, there may still be undiscovered issues or limitations. Over the next few weeks, extensive testing will be conducted on 1-2 million contracts to evaluate its performance and stability. Additional tests and comprehensive documentation will also be added during this phase.

Once we are confident that the project is fully ready for production, this disclaimer will be removed. Until then, please use the software with caution and report any potential issues or feedback to help us improve its quality.

## Why?

I have a strong preference for using Golang or Rust over Javascript. I found myself needing to parse Solidity code and conduct some analysis on it. During research, I discovered several projects that aimed to do this. However, they were either incomplete, not maintained, or not written in Go at all. This led me to the decision to create this project. The goal is to provide a Solidity parser in Golang that is as "complete as possible" and well-maintained. I'm excited to see how this project will develop and evolve.

## Documentation

To be defined ...

## Solidity Language Grammar

Latest Solidity language grammar higher overview and detailed description can be found [here](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.19/grammar.html).

## ANTLR Grammar

We are using grammar files that are maintained by the Solidity team.
Link to the grammar files can be found [here](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/tree/develop/docs/grammar).

## ANTLR Go

We are using the ANTLR4 Go runtime library to generate the parser. Repository can be found [here](https://github.com/antlr4-go/antlr).


## Features

- **Protocol Buffers**: SolGo uses [Protocol Buffers](https://github.com/txpull/protos) to provide a structured format for the data, enabling more effective analysis and a way to build a common interface for other tools. Supported languages: Go and Javascript. In the future, will be adding Rust and Python.
- **Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) Generation:** SolGo includes an builder that constructs an Abstract Syntax Tree for Solidity code.
- **Intermediate Representation (IR) Generation**: SolGo can generate an Intermediate Representation (IR) from the AST. The IR provides a language-agnostic representation of the contract, capturing key elements such as functions, state variables, events, and more. This enables more advanced analysis and manipulation of the contract.
- **Application Binary Interface (ABI) Generation:** SolGo includes an builder that can parse contract definitions to generate ABI for group of contracts or each contract individually. 
- **Syntax Error Handling**: SolGo includes listener which collects syntax errors encountered during parsing, providing detailed error information including line, column, message, severity, and context.
- **Automatic Source Detection**: SolGo automatically loads and integrates Solidity contracts from well-known libraries such as [OpenZeppelin](https://github.com/OpenZeppelin/openzeppelin-contracts).


## Extensions

- [SolGo RPC](https://github.com/txpull/solgo-rpc): A RPC server that exposes the functionality of SolGo via a gRPC. **(Under development)**


## Getting Started

To use SolGo, you will need to have Golang installed on your machine. You can then import SolGo into your Go programs like this:

```go
import "github.com/txpull/solgo"
```

## Logger setup

SolGo uses [zap](https://github.com/uber-go/zap) logger. To setup logger you can use following code:

```go
import (
	"go.uber.org/zap"
	"go.uber.org/zap/zapcore"
)

// ....

config := zap.NewDevelopmentConfig()
config.EncoderConfig.EncodeLevel = zapcore.CapitalColorLevelEncoder
logger, err := config.Build()
if err != nil {
	panic(err)
}

zap.ReplaceGlobals(logger)
```

I've deliberately decided not to pass logger as a reference to each struct. Truth to be told, with loggers, I am lazy to pass it everywhere... Instead, I'm using `zap.L()` function to get logger instance in each struct.

One day we can do something more efficient with logging. For now, this is good enough.

## Examples

Detailed examples of how to use this package can be found in the [Documentation](/docs/) section. These examples provide guidance on various operations such as extracting the ABI, AST, or contract information from Solidity code.


## Development Setup

To set up the development environment for this project, follow these steps:

1. **Go 1.19+**: Make sure you have Go version 1.19 or higher installed. You can find installation instructions [here](https://golang.org/doc/install).

2. **Java**: You need Java version 11 or higher installed to generate the parser. You can download Java from [here](https://www.oracle.com/java/technologies/javase-jdk11-downloads.html). After installing Java, make sure to set the `JAVA_HOME` environment variable to the location of your Java installation.

3. **ANTLR4**: The ANTLR4 is already included in this repository as .jar, which can be found in the [antlr](/antlr) directory. You don't need to build it separately. The current version used is 4.13.0.

Once you have completed these steps, you can start developing and testing your changes. To run the tests, use the command `make test` from the root directory of the repository.

The parser files are already generated and can be found in the [parser](/parser) directory. If you want to regenerate the parser, use the command `make generate` from the root directory of the repository. This will regenerate the parser files and place them in the [parser](/parser) directory.


## Contributing

Contributions to SolGo are always welcome! If you have a feature request, bug report, or proposal for improvement, please open an issue. If you wish to contribute code, please fork the repository, make your changes, and submit a pull request.


## License

SolGo is licensed under the Apache 2.0. See [LICENSE](LICENSE) for the full license text.


## Acknowledgements

We would like to express our gratitude to the Solidity team for maintaining the Solidity grammar files, and to the Antlr and AntlrGo team for providing the powerful Antlr tool that makes this project possible.
